-----BEGIN PGP SIGNED MESSAGE-----


                        Spoofed/Forged Email

1. DESCRIPTION

   This document provides a general overview of email spoofing and the
   problems that can result from it. It includes information that will help
   you respond to such activity.  

   Email spoofing may occur in different forms, but all have a similar result:
   a user receives email that appears to have originated from one source when
   it actually was sent from another source. Email spoofing is often an 
   attempt to trick the user into making a damaging statement or releasing
   sensitive information (such as passwords). 

   Examples of spoofed email that could affect the security of your site 
   include: 

        - email claiming to be from a system administrator requesting
          users to change their passwords to a specified string and
          threatening to suspend their account if they do not do this

        - email claiming to be from a person in authority requesting
          users to send them a copy of a password file or other sensitive
          information

   If, after investigating the activity, you find that there is more to the
   incident than spoofed email (such as a compromise at your site or another
   site), please refer to Section 4 below. 


2. TECHNICAL ISSUES

   2.1. If you provide email services to your user community, your users are
        vulnerable to spoofed or forged email.

   2.2. It is easy to spoof email because SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer
        Protocol) lacks authentication. If a site has configured the
        mail server to allow connections to the SMTP port, anyone can connect
        to the SMTP port of a site and (in accordance with that protocol)
        issue commands that will send email that appears to be from the
        address of the individual's choice; this can be a valid email
        address or a fictitious address that is correctly formatted.

   2.3. In addition to connecting to the SMTP port of a site, a user can send
        spoofed email via other protocols (for instance, by modifying their
        web browser interface).  


3. WHAT YOU CAN DO 

   3.1. Reaction

        3.1.1. You may be alerted to spoofed email attempts by reports from
               your users or by investigating bounced email error messages.

        3.1.2. Following relevant policies and procedures of your
               organization, review all information (such as mail headers and
               system log files) related to the spoofed email.

               Examine tcp_wrapper, ident, and sendmail logs to obtain
               information on the origin of the spoofed email.

               The header of the email message often contains a complete
               history of the "hops" the message has taken to reach its
               destination.  Information in the headers (such as the
               "Received:" and "Message-ID" information), in conjunction with
               your mail delivery logs, should help you to determine how the
               email reached your system. 

               If your mail reader does not allow you to review these headers,
               check the ASCII file that contains the original message. 

               NOTE: Some of the header information may be spoofed; and if
                     the abuser connected directly to the SMTP port on your
                     system, it may not be possible for you to identify the
                     source of the activity. 
               
        3.1.3. Follow up with other sites involved in this activity, if you
               can identify the sites. Contact them to alert them to the
               activity and help them determine the source of the original
               email. 

               We would appreciate a cc to "cert@cert.org" on your messages;
               this facilitates our work on incidents and helps us relate
               ongoing intruder activities.   

               If you have a CERT# reference for this incident, please include
               it in the subject line of all messages related to this
               incident. (NOTE: This reference number will be assigned by the
               CERT/CC, so if you do not have a reference number, one will be
               assigned once we receive the incident report.)  

               To find site contact information, please refer to

               ftp://info.cert.org/pub/whois_how_to

               You may also want to contact the postmaster at sites that
               may be involved. Send email to

               postmaster@[host.]site.domain (for example, postmaster@cert.org)

               Please include a copy of this document in your message to
               sites. 

        3.1.5. To provide as much information as possible to help trace this
               type of activity, you can increase the level of logging for your
               mailer delivery daemon. If you are using sendmail, a description
               of how to increase logging levels can be found in CERT advisory
               CA-93:16, available from

     ftp://info.cert.org/pub/cert_advisories/CA-93:16.sendmail.vulnerabilities 


               NOTE: Please be sure to review other sendmail advisories
                     as well for information on other sendmail
                     vulnerabilities. A brief description of every CERT
                     advisory is in 

                     ftp://info.cert.org/pub/cert_advisories/01-README

               For mailers other than sendmail, check your documentation or
               contact your vendor for details. 

        3.1.6. Realize that in some cases, you may not be able to identify the
               origin of the spoofed email.


   3.2. Prevention (Deterrence)

        3.2.1. Use cryptographic signatures (e.g., PGP "Pretty Good Privacy"
               or other encryption technologies) to exchange authenticated
               email messages. Authenticated email provides a mechanism for
               ensuring that messages are from whom they appear to be, as well
               as ensuring that the message has not been altered in transit.  

        3.2.2. Configure your mail delivery daemon to prevent someone from
               directly connecting to your SMTP port to send spoofed email to
               other sites.  

        3.2.3. Ensure that your mail delivery daemon allows logging and is
               configured to provide sufficient logging to assist you in
               tracking the origin of spoofed email.  

        3.2.4. Consider a single point of entry for email to your site. You can
               implement this by configuring your firewall so that SMTP
               connections from outside your firewall must go through a central
               mail hub. This will provide you with centralized logging, which
               may assist in detecting the origin of mail spoofing attempts to
               your site. 

        3.2.5. Educate your users about your site's policies and procedures in
               order to prevent them from being "social engineered," or
               tricked, into disclosing sensitive information (such as
               passwords). Have your users report any such activities to the
               appropriate system administrator(s) as soon as possible. See
               also CERT advisory CA-91:04, available from

            ftp://info.cert.org/pub/cert_advisories/CA-91:04.social.engineering



4. ADDITIONAL SECURITY MEASURES THAT YOU CAN TAKE

   4.1. If you have questions concerning legal issues, we encourage you to work
        with your legal counsel.  

        U.S. sites who are interested in investigating this activity can
        report it to the FBI:

             FBI National Computer Crimes Squad 
             Washington, DC
             +1 202 324-9164

        Non-U.S. sites may want to discuss the activity with their local law
        enforcement agency to determine the appropriate steps for pursuing an
        investigation.  

   4.2. For general security information, please see

        ftp://info.cert.org/pub/

   4.3. To report an incident, please complete and return

        ftp://info.cert.org/pub/incident_reporting_form



- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Copyright 1996 Carnegie Mellon University. Conditions for use, disclaimers,
and sponsorship information can be found in
http://www.cert.org/legal_stuff.html and ftp://ftp.cert.org/pub/legal_stuff .
If you do not have FTP or web access, send mail to cert@cert.org with
"copyright" in the subject line.

CERT is registered in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.

-----BEGIN PGP SIGNATURE-----
Version: 2.6.2

iQCVAwUBNDjWtXVP+x0t4w7BAQG6pAP8CJpPhzh0K+XwtgjXuLvnLJqaPVyyKIaK
CACbKsXUePIgFItXEz6VlLjJPRSg1ZG5qzScZLpabODoD4tE5LR08JAko4wunchj
qK0UcUhd/NKQaoB2G3O1rpuHIcH1FS0WxJwV6XpKxBzA5NBuSN/0KKpVrUQTi5Qx
jqtMl0KYX+o=
=pH0F
-----END PGP SIGNATURE-----
