-----BEGIN PGP SIGNED MESSAGE-----


                           Email Bombing and Spamming


1. DESCRIPTION

   This document provides a general overview of problems associated with
   electronic mail bombing and email spamming. It includes information that
   will help you respond to and recover from this activity. 

   Email "bombing" is characterized by abusers repeatedly sending an identical
   email message to a particular address. 

   Email "spamming" is a variant of bombing; it refers to sending email to  
   hundreds or thousands of users (or to lists that expand to that many
   users). Email spamming can be made worse if recipients reply to the email,
   causing all the original addressees to receive the reply. It may also occur
   innocently, as a result of sending a message to mailing lists and not
   realizing that the list explodes to thousands of users, or as a result of
   an incorrectly set-up responder message (such as vacation(1)).

   Email bombing/spamming may be combined with email "spoofing" (which alters
   the identity of the account sending the email), making it more difficult
   to determine who the email is actually coming from. (For more details on
   email spoofing, see ftp://info.cert.org/pub/tech_tips/email_spoofing.) 


2. TECHNICAL ISSUES

   2.1.1. If you provide email services to your user community, your users are
          vulnerable to email bombing and spamming. 

   2.1.2. Email spamming is almost impossible to prevent because a user with a
          valid email address can "spam" any other valid email address,
          newsgroup, or bulletin-board service. 

   2.1.3. When large amounts of email are directed to or through a single
          site, the site may suffer a denial of service through loss of
          network connectivity, system crashes, or failure of a service
          because of 

          - overloading network connections

          - using all available system resources

          - filling the disk as a result of multiple postings and resulting
            syslog entries


3. WHAT YOU CAN DO 

   3.1. Detection

        If your system suddenly appears sluggish (email is slow or
        doesn't appear to be sent or received), the reason may be that
        your mailer is trying to process a large number of messages. 

   3.2. Reaction

        3.2.1. Identify the source of the email bomb/spam and configure your
               router (or have your Network Service Provider configure the
               router) to prevent incoming packets from that address.

               Review email headers to determine the true origin of the email.
               Review the information related to the email bomb/spam following
               relevant policies and procedures of your organization. 

        3.2.2  Follow up with the site(s) you identified in your review to
               alert them to the activity.  Contact them to alert them to the
               activity. 

               NOTE: When contacting these sites, keep in mind that the abuser
                     may be trying to hide their identity. 

               We would appreciate a cc to "cert@cert.org" on your messages;
               this facilitates our work on incidents and helps us relate
               ongoing intruder activities.   

               If you have a CERT# reference for this incident, please include
               it in the subject line of all messages related to this
               incident. (NOTE: This reference number will be assigned by the
               CERT/CC, so if you do not have a reference number, one will be
               assigned once we receive the incident report.)  

               To find site contact information, please refer to

               ftp://info.cert.org/pub/whois_how_to
                     
        3.2.3. Ensure you are up to date with the most current version of
               email delivery daemon (sendmail, for example) and increase
               logging capabilities as necessary to detect or alert you to
               such activity. 


   3.3. Prevention

        Unfortunately, at this time, there is no way to prevent email bombing
        or spamming (other than disconnecting from the Internet), and it
        is impossible to predict the origin of the next attack. It is trivial
        to obtain access to large mailing lists or information resources that
        contain large volumes of email addresses that will provide destination
        email addresses for the spam.   

        3.3.1. Develop in-house tools to help you recognize and respond to the
               email bombing/spamming and so minimize the impact of such
               activity. The tools should increase the logging capabilities
               and check for and alert you to incoming/outgoing messages that
               originate from the same user or same site in a very short span
               of time. Once you identify the activity, you can use other
               in-house tools to discard the messages from the offending
               users or sites. 

        3.3.2. If your site uses a small number of email servers, you may want
               to configure your firewall to ensure that SMTP connections from
               outside your firewall can be made only to your central email
               hubs and to none of your other systems. Although this will not
               prevent an attack, it minimizes the number of machines
               available to an intruder for an SMTP-based attack (whether that
               attack is a email spam or an attempt to break into a host). It
               also means that should you wish to control incoming SMTP in a
               particular way (through filtering or another means), you have
               only a small number of systems--the main email hub and any
               backup email hubs--to configure. More information on filtering
               is available from

               ftp://info.cert.org/pub/tech_tips/packet_filtering

        3.3.3. Educate your users to call you about email bombing and spamming.
               
        3.3.4  Do not propagate the problem by forwarding (or replying to)
               spammed email.


4. ADDITIONAL SECURITY MEASURES THAT YOU CAN TAKE

   4.1. If you have questions concerning legal issues, we encourage you to
        work with your legal counsel.  

        U.S. sites interested in an investigation of this activity can
        contact the FBI:

             FBI National Computer Crimes Squad 
             Washington, DC
             +1 202 324-9164

        Non-U.S. sites may want to discuss the activity with their local law
        enforcement agency to determine the appropriate steps for pursuing
        an investigation. 

   4.2. For general security information, please see

        ftp://info.cert.org/pub/

   4.3. To report an incident, please complete and return

        ftp://info.cert.org/pub/incident_reporting_form





- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Copyright 1996 Carnegie Mellon University. Conditions for use, disclaimers,
and sponsorship information can be found in
http://www.cert.org/legal_stuff.html and ftp://ftp.cert.org/pub/legal_stuff .
If you do not have FTP or web access, send mail to cert@cert.org with
"copyright" in the subject line.

CERT is registered in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.

-----BEGIN PGP SIGNATURE-----
Version: 2.6.2

iQCVAwUBNDjWkHVP+x0t4w7BAQGKwwQA03f0+yH4AK+NEhHV1puoD+fPfyrFI+By
t0VLH5krqWU3y/mZlOe354fWa6pI8YYc+ZY3uh+jt4KJsmhL+LFLFuGMadBpHFfp
QEVrUr2/VbD03V3jWa4tgNQmdw92ioB9GoOGM9tHZ6itBLIwj/B4Bo6u3QY3wDss
pacv+hhX6+g=
=nzSp
-----END PGP SIGNATURE-----
